---
layout: post
title: CS 436
subtitle: Distributed Systems for non CS
image: /img/avatar-icon.png
categories: notes
tags: [template, markdown]
---
## Topology

IP addresses can be blocked by firewall.

Cell phone towers have 3 triangular boards on top.

Internet access point are (AP) used for wifi.

End systems (points, hosts) are user devices. These are all connected to an internet access point called a switch or hub.

Many switches and hubs connect to one router (MC has one in the basement). 

Many routers connect to a big router of which 2 exist on campus (1 as backup in case the other malfunctions).

The routers are then serviced by local, tier-2 ISPs, e.g. Hydro-One, Cogent which connect to tier-1 ISPs like AT&T.

**Data centers** store servers and a cooling system. Google develops their own servers, processors, chips and networks and keep them in data centers that can connect directly to a tier-2 ISP in place of a tier-1 ISP.

An **address** is like a street whereas **port numbers** are individual house numbers you want to connect to.

A **router** **multiplexes** or gathers up all the port numbers from one address on one end and connects to another **router** on the other end which **demultiplexes** or distributes into many other port numbers.

**TCP** uses **IP** address that makes up of address and port numbers.
IP addresses can be public or private (10.* or 192.168.*.*). The private ones are always dropped by the router before making it way out to the world.

All the packets going through a router are copied and sent to the NSA.

**NFS** (network file system) = instead of having all of your files stored locally, store them remotely on some server and fetch them as needed.

**Browser** acts as a **client** who fetches data in the form of HTML from a web server. Besides text, the HTML also contains links to other web servers.

=> telnet uwaterloo(address) 80 (port number)

then GET /somrdir/somefileHTML HTTP/11 where GET is a method, second is a location, and third is a version.

**Cookies** are a way for web servers to track you. Every time they service a request, a cookie will also be sent along, so the next time you send a query to that server, the cookie will also be sent along and mark your activity in their database. 
