---
layout: post
title: Kernel 1-4
<!--image: /img/avatar-icon.png-->
categories: courses/cs452
tags: [testfile]
---

**BIOS/UEFI** is firmware, the first program executed that loads the actual **OS** from hard disk (or SSD) into RAM.

The **kernel** is a just a function like any other, but it runs forever in **supervisor** (kernel) mode to execute important instructions that only an OS can see.

The same 16 ARM registers are used for different purposes in different modes, i.e. each register has a version for each mode, e.g. R14_irq

**BL** instruction = **branch** to one address, then **return** to the address stored in **Link Register**
```
start:
    01:  MOV r0, r2     ; some instruction
    02:  B there        ; go there and never return !

there:
    11:  MOV r1, r0         ; some instruction
    12:  BL some_function   ; this BL will load 15 into LR
    13:  MOV r6, r0

some_function:
    MOV r0, #3
    B LR               ; here, we go back to where we were before
```
If you want to call another function inside a function, LR will be overwritten, so you won't be able to return. The common solution is to save LR on the stack with PUSH {LR}, and restore it before returning with POP {LR}.  

**ip** register does NOT stand for instruction pointer. It's **intra procedure** call scratch register (r12), so scratch register.

The four modes that we will be using (ARM architecture (p.43):

- IRQ (entered when normal interrupt is raised)
- Supervisor (aslo called kernel or SVC)
- System (priviledged mode using **same registers**  as user mode (no SPSR))
- User (unpriledged mode under which most tasks run)

**Busy-wait IO**
- **bwsetfifo** turn fifos on and off.
- **bwsetspeed** set the transmit/receive speed of a channel: 115k bits/sec for the monitor and 2400bps for the train controller.
- **bwputr** outputs a machine word (contents of a register or a memory location); easy to call from assembly by loading reg0 with a channel UART number and reg1 with the word you want to print.
    ```
    mov r0, #1
    mov r1, sp
    bl bwputr
    ```
Looks like UART has 2 channels (intput and output buffers) for each COM1 and COM2.

**Context Switch**

needs to confirm state of caches and memory and co-processor

kerxit

1. push the kernel registers onto its stack;
2. change to system state;
3. get the sp, spsr and return value of the active task from its TD;
4. pop the registers of the active task from its stack;
5. put the return value in r0;
6. return to svc state;
7. install the spsr of the active task; and
8. install the pc of the active task.

**bl kerent** is where context switch occurs.   

kerent

1. acquire the arguments of the request, which are in registers that might be over-written;
2. acquire the lr, which is the pc of the active task;
3. change to system state;
4. overwrite lr with the value from 2;
5. push the registers of the active task onto its stack;
6. acquire the sp of the active task;
7. return to svc state;
8. acquire the spsr of the active task;
9. pop the registers of the kernel from its stack;
10. fill in the request with its arguments; and
11. put the sp and the spsr into the TD of the active task.

**IMPORTANT** Think of a way to do context switch without having to save r0-r3 because it only works for *swi*. For hardware interrupts, will have to save all registers.




## Task Creation

**Create**

- Once function returns with a task descriptor, task's stack has been initialized AND tasks been entered into ready queue.
- ??? Check if function pointer is valid.

**MyTid**
**MyParentTid**
returns tid of parent of the running task; if the parent has exited or been destroyed, implementation-dependent
**Pass** causes running task to give up its time although still being ready at the end of pq.
**Exit** does not return; causes a task to cease execution permanently, and removed from all q's; its memory and Tid not reclaimed.
**Destroy** complicated, see separate doc.

A task is in either one of seven states  (including zombie where task never runs again but still retains resources at any time.

##Inter-task Communication

Synchronization and communication between two threads are carried out at the same time like this:
s
- Process 1 does a "Send" to Process 2. Process 1 is now "send-blocked".
- Process 2 does a "Receive" and gets the message sent by Process 1. Process 1 is now "reply-blocked".
- Process 2, still running, processes the message from Process 1. It may do other Receives or Sends to other processes in the meantime. After a while, it is ready to Reply.
- Process 2 does a "Reply" to Process 1. Process 1 gets the reply message and is now unblocked.

Or like this:

- Process 2 does a "Receive", but nobody is sending to Process 2 yet. Process 2 is now "receive-blocked".
- Process 1 does a "Send" to Process 2. Process 1 immediately becomes "reply-blocked" and Process 2 is unblocked.
(the rest is the same as above).

Each task has a CPSR that is saved when its interrupted and re-installed when it's next activated.  

Many tasks enter the kernel with requests for service. Because a task might not be run next, return values have to be saved somewhere.

### Scheduling
Numer of priorities is implementation-dependent.

FIFO queues are used to implement round-robin scheduling for tasks at same priority.

If there are no ready tasks, we can:
- Use an idle task at the lowest priority running waiting to be interrupted.
- Put CPU to halt state

**Endianness**
is the order in which to interprete memory locations.
- big endian: big-end first
- little endian: little-end first

Since values in memory are inherently meaningless until casted to a type. 

For example, a short int takes up 2 bytes in memory. First byte starts at position 0 with value 0x12 and second at position 1 with value 0x34. We can interprete the int in two ways:
- big-endian: first byte is "bigger" which means its shifted to the left 8 bits (2^8 = 256). In this case, the int has the value of (256*18 + 52) =_0x1234.
- little: 0x3412

###Interrupts
Interrupts are often divided into synchronous and asynchronous interrupts:

**Synchronous** interrupts are produced by the CPU control unit while executing instructions and are called synchronous because the control unit issues them only after terminating the execution of an instruction.

**Asynchronous** interrupts are generated by other hardware devices at arbitrary times with respect to the CPU clock signals. (internet)

### SPSR and CPSR
Refer to p.31 + p.49 of the ARM architecture manual for more info.

All processor state other than the general-purpose register contents is held in status registers. The current
operating processor status is in the Current Program Status Register (CPSR). 

Each exception mode also has a Saved Program Status Register (SPSR) which holds the CPSR of the task
immediately before the exception occurred. The CPSR and the SPSRs are accessed with special
instructions. 


To change mode or enable IRQs, modify/write to CPSR like so:
```
MSR R12, CPSR   // similar to MOV for system registers  
BIC R12, R12, #0x1F // to switch into svc mode
ORR R12, R12, #0x13
MSR CPSR_c, R12
```

The software interrupt has an inverse instruction which, executed immediately following it, undoes its effect. Its most common form is

`movs	pc, lr`
  
which has the following effect.
- The pc gets the contents of the lr of user.
- The user cpsr gets the contents of the kernel spsr.

### Registers
**PC** = R15

**LR** = R14

**SP** = R13

### PC
When an instruction reads the PC, the value read depends on which instruction set it comes from:
• For an ARM instruction, the value read is the address of the instruction plus 8 bytes

### Exceptions
More than one exception can arise at the same time.

Refer to p.54.

The ARM architecture supports **7 types of exception**, of which 3 are all we care.
- Reset
- SWI (p.58)
- IRQ (ordinary interrupt) (p.62)

When an exception occurs, execution is forced from a fixed memory address corresponding to the type of exception. These fixed addresses are called the exception  vectors. 

When an exception occurs, the banked versions of R14 and the SPSR for the exception mode are used to save state as follows:

```
R14_<exception_mode> = return link
SPSR_<exception_mode> = CPSR
CPSR[4:0] = exception mode number
CPSR[5] = 0 /* Execute in ARM state */
if <exception_mode> == Reset or FIQ then
CPSR[6] = 1 /* Disable fast interrupts */
/* else CPSR[6] is unchanged */
CPSR[7] = 1 /* Disable normal interrupts */
if <exception_mode> != UNDEF or SWI then
CPSR[8] = 1 /* Disable imprecise aborts (v6 only) */
/* else CPSR[8] is unchanged */
CPSR[9] = CP15_reg1_EEbit /* Endianness on exception entry */
PC = exception vector address
```

To return after handling the exception, the SPSR is moved into the CPSR, and R14 is moved to the PC. This can be done atomically in two ways:
• using a data-processing instruction with the S bit set, and the PC as the destination
• using the Load Multiple with Restore CPSR instruction, as described in LDM (3) on page A4-40. 

Idea is to save CPSR to SPSR_x with x being the CPU mode (user, svc, etc.) then modify CPSR to whatever exception mode you want, then reload SPSR_x into CPSR once done.

Exception Priorities

## PC vs. LR

Let's say thread one is running, and it is executing instruction 0x1000, it calls a function located at 0x2000 at this point, and the Link register stores 0x1004. The PC has moved to the location where the function is located, 0x2008 (There are some gotchas about how PC is updated, if I remember right it is 2 words ahead of the current instruction being fetched).

Now a context switch occurs and another thread needs to start running. You will need to store the PC which is 0x2008 and also the LR which is 0x1004 so that after you switch back you can jump back to your earlier function (StackOverflow)

## TD

Task's state includes. Some are in struct TD, some on task's stack. 
- The values of all local variables.
- The values in its registers. Don't forget the address of the instruction it will execute when it next runs, which is one of two link registers.
- The values in its CPSR.
- SPSR (TD)
- link register (TD)
- Its task id (tid). This is the name by which it is known to other tasks in the system, and by the kernel. It must be easy to find the TD given only the tid. Implementing Destroy introduces complications. Task id must be unique
- Its parent's tid. It is probably active->tid when the task is being created. (TD)
- Its current run state: active, ready, blocked (TD)
- A pointer to the next TD on its ready queue. You are probably used to handling a priority queue differently than this, by allocating a list item with a pointer to a TD as its data. **Real-time software normally avoids memory allocation because it potentially has bad locality properties.**
- Its return value, because requests are handled on arrival (TD)
- Its priority, needed for putting the task into the right ready queue. (TD)

**Task's memory** must be exactly as if the task had just done a kernel entry

## Memory
mapped into a single block starting at 0x0, (32 Mbytes is 2^25 bytes.)

## RedBoot
Looks like RedBoot sets up the processor hardware. Some of its behaviors can be affected by previous student's settings.

## Kernel's DS

- an array of empty ready queues
- a pointer to the TD of the active task
- an array of TDs
- a free list of pointers to free TDs. This might take the form of bits set in a couple of words.
- a structure for keeping the request currently being serviced, including its arguments.
- WhoIs and RegisterAs are wrappers for Send requests to the NameServer, so they are blocking syscalls. 

Garbage collection cannot be a realtime operation. So memory has to be sectioned into chunks of same size. Our whole memory is 32MB, 3MB used by kernel stack, Reboot, and Redboot stack.

# Questions

- so orex.ld is how the data, code, stack, heap and bss are segmented ?
- switching modes doesn't bring up another set of 16 registers right? Answer: Yup, seen multiple times.
- whats the use of spsr, cpsr
- context switch assembly
- in kernel DS, a free list of pointers to free TDs. This might take the form of bits set in a couple of words.
- **Task's memory** must be exactly as if the task had just done a kernel entry (WHY???) look carefully at what your kernel exit code will do
- How to get first chunk of memory
- how much memory should be allocated for a task's stack?
- Right after entering kernel, the contents of the registers are of user. Wanna know the stack pointer of user, so we switch from svc to system mode to find user's SP. Then we can start pushing in system mode, then save that SP in some register from 0-12. Switch back to kernel. Now can save R14 and SPSR of user to user stack using that SP?
- Task vs. Process vs. Thread
- activate 
- 29MB in between redboot and reboot stack 25mb is reasonable 
- handling put task on ready q

## ARM instructions

```
- msr coproc_register1, Rn   // write the contents of Rn into the coprocessor register 1
- ldr r0, [r1] // load content of r0 into the address dictated by the content of r1
```

A status register. This is, like the other registers, a chunk of internal storage. But you can't manipulate it or access it directly. It's automatically updated by the ALU/FPU. Individual bits of the status register get updated to reflect various conditions about the current status of the CPU, and the results of the previous instruction. For example, the way that you can compare two values in the ARM is to subtract one from the other. If the two values were equal, then the ZERO flag in the status register will be set to 1; otherwise it will be set to 0. There's a branch instruction that only actually branches if the ZERO flag is set.



The way to switch an ARM system into user mode is to use the movs instruction to put some address to jump to (like the address of our function) into the pc register (the “program counter”, which is where the CPU is currently executing). But what mode will the CPU enter when we do this? The answer is that it will read the contents of a special register called SPSR (Saved Processor Status Register) and use that to change CPSR (Current Processor Status Register), and thus change modes. Couldn’t we just change CPSR directly? Because we’re not in user mode, we could, but since we want to jump into our function the moment we switch modes, this is the safest way to do it

# Kernel2

AllSendQ is array of size NUM_TD containing Buffer pointers, so the idea is that each task will have a buffer called SendQ.

**RPSServer** 

- has a SendQ to store all TaskIDs of Tasks that have sent to it.  This SendQ is kept in an array called AllSendQ at the RPSServer's TaskID.
- when it's time to run, it just gets a TaskID from its SendQ, and calls Receive

And once tasks become blocked, they r put on the lowest priority then raised again next time around.  

## CPSR and SPSR
- All processor modes except system and user mode have an SPSR.
- Records the pre-exception value of the CPSR.
- Upon taking an exception, the CPSR is copied to the SPSR of the processor mode the exception is taken to.
    - This is useful because the exception handler is able to restore the CPSR to the value prior to taking the exception, as well as being able to examine 
the CPSR in general.

## ICU
There are two ICUs ARM PL190 called VIC1 and VIC2 in the System on Chip. 
VIC stands for Vectored Interrupt Controller
IRQ stands for interrupt request is a hardware signal sent to the processor that temporarily stops a running program and allows a special program, an interrupt handler, to run instead
Looks like there is a special region from the VIC base for Software/SoftwareClear/etc. for all devices then use bit shift to determine which device to mask off (clear).

## Timer + Clock
Timers are simple counters that count at some frequency derived from the 16MHz system clock. 

Timer0 is an 8-bit that counts from 0 to 255 and generates an interrupt whenever it overflows.

timer interrupts are triggered when the counter reaches a specified value, stored in the compare match register.  Once a timer counter reaches this value it will clear (reset to zero) on the next tick of the timer's clock, then it will continue to count up to the compare match value again.  By choosing the compare match value and setting the speed at which the timer increments the counter, you can control the frequency of timer interrupts.

Counter == tick of clock

Hz (pronounced Herts) == ticks per second

The speed at which the timer increments the counter.  The Arduino clock runs at 16MHz, this is the fastest speed that the timers can increment their counters.  At 16MHz each tick of the counter represents 1/16,000,000 of a second (~63ns), so a counter will take 10/16,000,000 seconds to reach a value of 9 (counters are 0 indexed), and 100/16,000,000 seconds to reach a value of 99.


In many situations, you will find that setting the counter speed to 16MHz is too fast.  Timer0 and timer2 are 8 bit timers, meaning they can store a maximum counter value of 255.  Timer1 is a 16 bit timer, meaning it can store a maximum counter value of 65535.  Once a counter reaches its maximum, it will tick back to zero (this is called overflow).  This means at 16MHz, even if we set the compare match register to the max counter value, interrupts will occur every 256/16,000,000 seconds (~16us) for the 8 bit counters, and every 65,536/16,000,000 (~4 ms) seconds for the 16 bit counter.  Clearly, this is not very useful if you only want to interrupt once a second.


Back to our case, 32 bit timer => Max counter value is 2^32.
At ??? Hertz, that means an interrupt occurs every

Instead you can control the speed of the timer counter incrementation by using something called a prescaler.  A prescaler dictates the speed of your timer according the the following equation:

(timer speed (Hz)) = (Arduino clock speed (16MHz)) / prescaler

So a 1 prescaler will increment the counter at 16MHz, an 8 prescaler will increment it at 2MHz, a 64 prescaler = 250kHz, and so on.  As indicated in the tables above, the prescaler can equal 1, 8, 64, 256, and 1024.  (I'll explain the meaning of CS12, CS11, and CS10 in the next step.) 

Now you can calculate the interrupt frequency with the following equation:

interrupt frequency (Hz) = (Arduino clock speed 16,000,000Hz) / (prescaler * (compare match register + 1))
the +1 is in there because the compare match register is zero indexed

rearranging the equation above, you can solve for the compare match register value that will give your desired interrupt frequency:

compare match register = [ 16,000,000Hz/ (prescaler * desired interrupt frequency) ] - 1
remember that when you use timers 0 and 2 this number must be less than 256, and less than 65536 for timer1

so if you wanted an interrupt every second (frequency of 1Hz):
compare match register = [16,000,000 / (prescaler * 1) ] -1
with a prescaler of 1024 you get:
compare match register = [16,000,000 / (1024 * 1) ] -1
= 15,624
since 256 < 15,624 < 65,536, you must use timer1 for this interrupt.



## Hardware Interrupts

- By calling swi, a task voluntarily gives up its runtime.
- There are many interrupt types: UART1, UART2, TIMER3


## Hardware Interrupt Handler

on Redboot, if type `help`, we will see instruction `dump` which displays the contents in the first 32 registers. Type

```
dump -b 0x0 -l 32
```

then you will see the results in binary. Use an assembly on google or smth to disassemble it back to assembly language.

to see in register 0x18, the address of 0x38 or smth blah blah

lr svc stores pc user
now 
lr irq stores pc user

(Last Updated: June 9, 2018)