---
layout: post
title: MIT 6004 - Computation Structures
<!--image: /img/avatar-icon.png-->
categories: courses/mit6004
tags: [testfile]
---

I'm following this video lecture [series](https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=335&v=9DWlqtsNGV0). 

I'm only watching this lecture series so as to cover enough basics so I can move on to the course that I care more about MIT 6033. That explains why the notes are quite sparse and incomprehensive. 

# Lecture 1

- content information + uncertainty
- entropy
- encoding (ambiguity) + binary tree representation
- hamming distance
- parity bit

# Lecture 2

- noise margins (V_OL < V_IL < V_IH < V_OH)
- a buffer does almost nothing in == out
- **Voltage Transfer Characteristic**: devices with gain (voltage in gets amplified to become voltage out) and nonlinear

# Lecture 4
Mux vs. Decoder

# Lecture 5

AND gate = NAND CMOS + inverter CMOS
NAND and NOR gates are universal, can be used to build anything

Lecture 11

- return address
- return value

## Lecture 12

- base pointer saves address of last line of code of last stack frame
- linkage pointer saves address of instruction to return to after a jump
- charge leaks from capacitors over time

# Lecture 21

User programs wait for I/O will raise an interrupt which will start running code in the kernel to wait for input from hardware.

User programs know nothing about the hardware. It's the kernel's job to fill the I/O buffer (ea process has one) then notify user programs.

*Supervisor calls (SVC)* act as an interface between a user program and a kernel. Result obtained from calling a supervisor call is stored in one of the registers, which can be retrived later by the program.

Processes that are waiting for inputs are put to sleep (i.e. status set to non-zero) in the queue for the event they are waiting for. 
When the event happens, which triggers their status to be changed to 0, the scheduler will now "see" these processes as active and include them in the round robin scheduling. 

*Preemption* is a form of interrupt because you're basically cut short an interrupt handler to serve another.

Round robin scheduling won't cut it for real time performance => threads are assigned different priorities and run accordingly (high to low).

# Lecture 22

Dijkstra invented semaphores.
- 'wait' and 'signal' enforce ordering of Producer and Consumer

# Lecture 23

Ea core contains all execution units including parallel optimization.

(Last Updated: June 9, 2018)